docs/schema.md, before:

# Database Schema

This document describes the **implemented** PostgreSQL schema as of migration `005_price_daily.sql`.  
It will be updated with each new migration (`003_*`, `004_*`, …).

---

## Table of Contents
- [Schema & Extension](#schema--extension)
- [Tables](#tables)
  - [1) market.exchange](#1-marketexchange)
  - [2) market.instrument](#2-marketinstrument)
  - [3) market.instrument_alias](#3-marketinstrument_alias)
  - [4) market.universe](#4-marketuniverse)
  - [5) market.universe_member](#5-marketuniverse_member)
  - [6) View: market.v_universe_current](#6-view-marketv_universe_current)
  - [7) market.price_daily (v002)](#7-marketprice_daily-v002)
  - [8) market.feature_daily (v003)](#8-marketfeature_daily-v003)
  - [9) market.news_item (v004)](#9-marketnews_item-v004)
  - [10) market.news_link (v004)](#10-marketnews_link-v004)
  - [11) market.sector (v005)](#11-marketsector-v005)
  - [12) market.industry (v005)](#12-marketindustry-v005)
  - [13) market.instrument_classification (v005)](#13-marketinstrument_classification-v005)
  - [14) market.etf_holding (v005)](#14-marketetf_holding-v005)
- [Seed Data](#seed-data-from-001_market_coresql)
- [Common Queries](#common-queries)
- [General Notes & Rationale](#general-notes--rationale)

---

## Schema & Extension

- **Schema:** `market`
- **Extension:** `pg_trgm` (for fuzzy text search on instrument names)

---

## Tables

### 1) `market.exchange` (001)

Reference list of trading venues.
- **PK:** `exchange_id SERIAL`
- **Unique:** `code` (e.g., `NASDAQ`, `NYSE`), optional `mic` (e.g., `XNAS`, `XNYS`)
- **Fields:** `name`, `country` (default `US`), `timezone` (default `America/New_York`), `is_active` (default `true`)
- **Purpose:** Normalize venue metadata; referenced by instruments.

---

### 2) `market.instrument` (001)

Canonical instruments (stocks, ETFs, etc.) with a stable ID.
- **PK:** `instrument_id BIGSERIAL`
- **FK:** `exchange_id → market.exchange(exchange_id)`
- **Unique:** `(exchange_id, symbol)`; optional uniques: `figi`, `cik`, `isin`
- **Indexes:** `GIN(name gin_trgm_ops)` for fuzzy search
- **Fields:** `symbol`, `name`, `type` (`EQUITY`, `ETF`, …), `currency` (`USD`), `status` (`ACTIVE`/`DELISTED`/`SUSPENDED`), `created_at`, `updated_at`
- **Purpose:** Stable identity for instruments even if symbols change.

---

### 3) `market.instrument_alias` (001)

Alternate identifiers and historical symbols.
- **PK:** `alias_id BIGSERIAL`
- **FK:** `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id)` **ON DELETE CASCADE**
- **Unique:** `(source, value)` (e.g., `('YAHOO','AAPL')`, `('OLD_SYMBOL','GOOG')`)
- **Fields:** `source`, `value`
- **Purpose:** Clean mapping to/from external providers and legacy names.

---

### 4) `market.universe` (001)

Named selection sets (watchlists / processing scopes).
- **PK:** `universe_id SERIAL`
- **Unique:** `code` (e.g., `core`, `etf-core`, `tech-watch`)
- **Fields:** `name`, `description`
- **Purpose:** Decouple “what exists” (instruments) from “what we process now”.

---

### 5) `market.universe_member` (001)

Temporal membership of instruments in universes.
- **PK:** `(universe_id, instrument_id)`
- **FKs:**  
  - `universe_id → market.universe(universe_id)` **ON DELETE CASCADE**  
  - `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id)` **ON DELETE CASCADE**
- **Fields:** `added_at` (default now), `removed_at` (NULL = active)
- **Purpose:** Maintain history of additions/removals without losing auditability.

---

### 6) View: `market.v_universe_current` (001)

Convenience view of **current** (active) universe memberships.
- **Columns:** `universe_code`, `universe_id`, `instrument_id`
- **Definition:** joins `market.universe_member` to `market.universe` where `removed_at IS NULL`

---

### 7) `market.price_daily` (v002)

Daily OHLCV per instrument, **partitioned monthly** on `trade_date`.
- **PK:** `(instrument_id, trade_date)`
- **FK:** `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id)` (CASCADE on delete)
- **Columns:** `open`, `high`, `low`, `close`, `adj_close`, `volume`, `source`, `updated_at`
- **Partitioning:** `PARTITION BY RANGE (trade_date)` with one child table per month
- **Index:** `ix_price_daily_trade_date` (partitioned index on `trade_date`)

**Rationale**
- Daily bars don’t need time zones → `trade_date DATE`.
- Monthly partitions keep indexes small and enable fast date-range queries.
- Easy retention/archival (detach/drop older partitions if needed).
- `PRIMARY KEY (instrument_id, trade_date)` prevents duplicates from multiple providers.

**Notes**
- Insert/upsert should use the **canonical `instrument_id`**.
- For intraday bars, a separate partitioned table will be added (e.g., `price_intraday`).

---

### 8) `market.feature_daily` (v003)

Daily feature payloads per instrument. Supports multiple pipelines per day.

- **PK:** `(instrument_id, trade_date, pipeline)`
- **FK:** `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id)` (CASCADE on delete)
- **Columns:**  
  - `pipeline TEXT` — feature set name (e.g., `tech`, `nlp`, `risk`, `default`)  
  - `version TEXT` — optional pipeline version tag  
  - `features JSONB` — computed features (flexible schema)  
  - `updated_at TIMESTAMPTZ` — audit timestamp
- **Indexes:**  
  - `ix_feature_daily_trade_date` (btree)  
  - `ix_feature_daily_instrument` (btree)  
  - `ix_feature_daily_features_gin` (GIN on `features`)

**Rationale**
- JSONB keeps the schema flexible while we iterate on features.
- `pipeline` lets us store multiple independent feature sets for the same day.
- GIN index enables fast existence/containment queries on feature keys.

**Notes**
- Always join/resolve with **`instrument_id`** (canonical id).
- Consider adding **expression indexes** later for hot features (e.g., `((features->>'rsi_14')::numeric)`).

---

### 9) `market.news_item` (v004)

Unified table for **news articles** and **social posts**, partitioned **monthly** by `published_at`.

- **PK:** `(published_at, news_id)`  ← composite key, required for partitioned table
- **Partitioning:** `PARTITION BY RANGE (published_at)`; one child per month
- **Columns:**
  - `kind TEXT` — `'NEWS'` or `'SOCIAL'`
  - `source TEXT` — provider (`REUTERS`, `BLOOMBERG`, `REDDIT`, `X`, `THREADS`, …)
  - `external_id TEXT` — provider’s primary id (tweet id, reddit id, article id)
  - `published_at TIMESTAMPTZ` — event time (UTC)
  - `url TEXT`, `author TEXT`, `lang TEXT`
  - `title TEXT`, `content TEXT`, `summary TEXT`
  - `sentiment_label TEXT` (`NEG`/`NEU`/`POS`), `sentiment_score NUMERIC(6,5)`
  - `topic_tags TEXT[]`
  - `engagement JSONB` — counts (likes, retweets, upvotes, …)
  - `raw JSONB` — original provider payload
  - `tsv_en tsvector (generated)` — full-text search over title+content
- **Indexes:**
  - `ix_news_item_published_at` (btree)
  - `ix_news_item_title_trgm` (GIN trigram for fuzzy title search)
  - `ix_news_item_tsv_en` (GIN full-text)
  - `ix_news_item_raw_gin` (GIN on raw JSONB)
  - `ix_news_item_source_external` (btree)
  - `ix_news_item_url` (btree)

**Rationale**
- A single table simplifies ingestion pipelines across providers.
- Monthly partitions keep search fast and enable retention policies.
- Both **trigram** and **full-text** indexes support different search styles (fuzzy vs. linguistic).

---

### 10) `market.news_link` (v004)

Links news/social items to instruments.

- **PK:** `(news_published_at, news_id, instrument_id)`
- **FKs:**  
  - `(news_published_at, news_id)` → `market.news_item(published_at, news_id)` (CASCADE)  
  - `instrument_id` → `market.instrument(instrument_id)` (CASCADE)
- **Columns:** `relevance REAL`, `method TEXT`
- **Index:** `ix_news_link_instrument` for quick “what news affected this instrument?”

**Rationale**
- Separates content from entity linking; supports many-to-many with relevance scoring.
- Multiple linking methods (NER, hashtag parsing, `$TICKER` rules) can co-exist.

---

### 11) `market.sector` (v005)

Tracks how instruments are classified into sector/industry over time.
- **PK:** `sector_id`
- **Unique:** `code`
- **Fields:** `name`

---

### 12) `market.industry` (v005)

Reference table for industries (optionally linked to sector).
- **PK:** `industry_id`
- **Unique:** `code`
- **FK:** `sector_id → market.sector(sector_id) [SET NULL]`
- **Fields:** `name`

---

### 13) `market.instrument_classification` (v005)

Temporal classification (SCD2-lite) of instruments into sector/industry.
- **PK:** `(instrument_id, valid_from)`
- **FKs:**  
  - `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id) [CASCADE]`  
  - `sector_id → market.sector(sector_id) [SET NULL]`  
  - `industry_id → market.industry(industry_id) [SET NULL]`
- **Fields:** `valid_from DATE`, `valid_to DATE NULL` (NULL = current)
- **Index:** `ix_instr_class_current` on `(instrument_id)` where `valid_to IS NULL`

**Rationale**
- Allows reclassification over time without losing history.
- Joins cleanly with features/prices on the date dimension.

---

### 14) `market.etf_holding` (v005)

ETF composition snapshots (constituents & weights) by `as_of_date`.
- **PK:** `(etf_id, component_id, as_of_date)`
- **FKs:** both `etf_id` and `component_id` → `market.instrument(instrument_id)` [CASCADE]
- **Fields:** `weight NUMERIC(9,6)`, `shares NUMERIC(20,6)`, `market_value_usd NUMERIC(20,6)`, `source TEXT`
- **Indexes:** `ix_etf_holding_asof` (as_of_date), `ix_etf_holding_component` (component_id)

**Rationale**
- Supports ETF-driven dependencies and sector/industry rollups.
- Enables features like “ETF-weighted sentiment” or “component-weighted returns”.

---

## Seed Data (from `001_market_core.sql`)

- Exchanges: `NASDAQ (XNAS)`, `NYSE (XNYS)`
- Instruments: `AAPL`, `MSFT` (EQUITY), `QQQ` (ETF) on NASDAQ
- Universe: `core` with `AAPL`, `MSFT`, `QQQ` as active members

---

## Common Queries

### Current members of a universe

```sql
SELECT i.instrument_id, i.symbol
FROM market.v_universe_current c
JOIN market.instrument i USING (instrument_id)
WHERE c.universe_code = 'core'
ORDER BY i.symbol;
```

### Resolve by exact symbol + exchange

```sql
SELECT i.instrument_id, i.symbol
FROM market.instrument i
JOIN market.exchange e ON e.exchange_id = i.exchange_id
WHERE i.symbol = 'AAPL' AND e.code = 'NASDAQ';
```

### Resolve via alias (e.g., from a provider)

```sql
SELECT i.instrument_id, i.symbol
FROM market.instrument_alias a
JOIN market.instrument i ON i.instrument_id = a.instrument_id
WHERE a.source = 'YAHOO' AND a.value = 'AAPL';
```

---

## General Notes & Rationale

- Use the **stable** `instrument_id` everywhere (prices, features, forecasts) to avoid identity issues on symbol changes.
- **Universes** give a flexible “selected set” mechanism with temporal history via `removed_at`.
- **Aliases** centralize cross-provider mappings.
- The **trigram index** on name supports admin/search tooling and data cleaning.

Commit message:

docs(schema): document data/reference as Git-tracked seed folder and its usage

docs/schema.md, after:

# Database Schema

This document describes the **implemented** PostgreSQL schema as of migration `005_price_daily.sql`.  
It will be updated with each new migration (`003_*`, `004_*`, …).

---

## Table of Contents
- [Schema & Extension](#schema--extension)
- [Tables](#tables)
  - [1) market.exchange](#1-marketexchange)
  - [2) market.instrument](#2-marketinstrument)
  - [3) market.instrument_alias](#3-marketinstrument_alias)
  - [4) market.universe](#4-marketuniverse)
  - [5) market.universe_member](#5-marketuniverse_member)
  - [6) View: market.v_universe_current](#6-view-marketv_universe_current)
  - [7) market.price_daily (v002)](#7-marketprice_daily-v002)
  - [8) market.feature_daily (v003)](#8-marketfeature_daily-v003)
  - [9) market.news_item (v004)](#9-marketnews_item-v004)
  - [10) market.news_link (v004)](#10-marketnews_link-v004)
  - [11) market.sector (v005)](#11-marketsector-v005)
  - [12) market.industry (v005)](#12-marketindustry-v005)
  - [13) market.instrument_classification (v005)](#13-marketinstrument_classification-v005)
  - [14) market.etf_holding (v005)](#14-marketetf_holding-v005)
- [Seed Data](#seed-data-from-001_market_coresql)
- [Common Queries](#common-queries)
- [General Notes & Rationale](#general-notes--rationale)

---

## Schema & Extension

- **Schema:** `market`
- **Extension:** `pg_trgm` (for fuzzy text search on instrument names)

---

## Tables

### 1) `market.exchange` (001)

Reference list of trading venues.
- **PK:** `exchange_id SERIAL`
- **Unique:** `code` (e.g., `NASDAQ`, `NYSE`), optional `mic` (e.g., `XNAS`, `XNYS`)
- **Fields:** `name`, `country` (default `US`), `timezone` (default `America/New_York`), `is_active` (default `true`)
- **Purpose:** Normalize venue metadata; referenced by instruments.

---

### 2) `market.instrument` (001)

Canonical instruments (stocks, ETFs, etc.) with a stable ID.
- **PK:** `instrument_id BIGSERIAL`
- **FK:** `exchange_id → market.exchange(exchange_id)`
- **Unique:** `(exchange_id, symbol)`; optional uniques: `figi`, `cik`, `isin`
- **Indexes:** `GIN(name gin_trgm_ops)` for fuzzy search
- **Fields:** `symbol`, `name`, `type` (`EQUITY`, `ETF`, …), `currency` (`USD`), `status` (`ACTIVE`/`DELISTED`/`SUSPENDED`), `created_at`, `updated_at`
- **Purpose:** Stable identity for instruments even if symbols change.

---

### 3) `market.instrument_alias` (001)

Alternate identifiers and historical symbols.
- **PK:** `alias_id BIGSERIAL`
- **FK:** `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id)` **ON DELETE CASCADE**
- **Unique:** `(source, value)` (e.g., `('YAHOO','AAPL')`, `('OLD_SYMBOL','GOOG')`)
- **Fields:** `source`, `value`
- **Purpose:** Clean mapping to/from external providers and legacy names.

---

### 4) `market.universe` (001)

Named selection sets (watchlists / processing scopes).
- **PK:** `universe_id SERIAL`
- **Unique:** `code` (e.g., `core`, `etf-core`, `tech-watch`)
- **Fields:** `name`, `description`
- **Purpose:** Decouple “what exists” (instruments) from “what we process now”.

---

### 5) `market.universe_member` (001)

Temporal membership of instruments in universes.
- **PK:** `(universe_id, instrument_id)`
- **FKs:**  
  - `universe_id → market.universe(universe_id)` **ON DELETE CASCADE**  
  - `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id)` **ON DELETE CASCADE**
- **Fields:** `added_at` (default now), `removed_at` (NULL = active)
- **Purpose:** Maintain history of additions/removals without losing auditability.

---

### 6) View: `market.v_universe_current` (001)

Convenience view of **current** (active) universe memberships.
- **Columns:** `universe_code`, `universe_id`, `instrument_id`
- **Definition:** joins `market.universe_member` to `market.universe` where `removed_at IS NULL`

---

### 7) `market.price_daily` (v002)

Daily OHLCV per instrument, **partitioned monthly** on `trade_date`.
- **PK:** `(instrument_id, trade_date)`
- **FK:** `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id)` (CASCADE on delete)
- **Columns:** `open`, `high`, `low`, `close`, `adj_close`, `volume`, `source`, `updated_at`
- **Partitioning:** `PARTITION BY RANGE (trade_date)` with one child table per month
- **Index:** `ix_price_daily_trade_date` (partitioned index on `trade_date`)

**Rationale**
- Daily bars don’t need time zones → `trade_date DATE`.
- Monthly partitions keep indexes small and enable fast date-range queries.
- Easy retention/archival (detach/drop older partitions if needed).
- `PRIMARY KEY (instrument_id, trade_date)` prevents duplicates from multiple providers.

**Notes**
- Insert/upsert should use the **canonical `instrument_id`**.
- For intraday bars, a separate partitioned table will be added (e.g., `price_intraday`).

---

### 8) `market.feature_daily` (v003)

Daily feature payloads per instrument. Supports multiple pipelines per day.

- **PK:** `(instrument_id, trade_date, pipeline)`
- **FK:** `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id)` (CASCADE on delete)
- **Columns:**  
  - `pipeline TEXT` — feature set name (e.g., `tech`, `nlp`, `risk`, `default`)  
  - `version TEXT` — optional pipeline version tag  
  - `features JSONB` — computed features (flexible schema)  
  - `updated_at TIMESTAMPTZ` — audit timestamp
- **Indexes:**  
  - `ix_feature_daily_trade_date` (btree)  
  - `ix_feature_daily_instrument` (btree)  
  - `ix_feature_daily_features_gin` (GIN on `features`)

**Rationale**
- JSONB keeps the schema flexible while we iterate on features.
- `pipeline` lets us store multiple independent feature sets for the same day.
- GIN index enables fast existence/containment queries on feature keys.

**Notes**
- Always join/resolve with **`instrument_id`** (canonical id).
- Consider adding **expression indexes** later for hot features (e.g., `((features->>'rsi_14')::numeric)`).

---

### 9) `market.news_item` (v004)

Unified table for **news articles** and **social posts**, partitioned **monthly** by `published_at`.

- **PK:** `(published_at, news_id)`  ← composite key, required for partitioned table
- **Partitioning:** `PARTITION BY RANGE (published_at)`; one child per month
- **Columns:**
  - `kind TEXT` — `'NEWS'` or `'SOCIAL'`
  - `source TEXT` — provider (`REUTERS`, `BLOOMBERG`, `REDDIT`, `X`, `THREADS`, …)
  - `external_id TEXT` — provider’s primary id (tweet id, reddit id, article id)
  - `published_at TIMESTAMPTZ` — event time (UTC)
  - `url TEXT`, `author TEXT`, `lang TEXT`
  - `title TEXT`, `content TEXT`, `summary TEXT`
  - `sentiment_label TEXT` (`NEG`/`NEU`/`POS`), `sentiment_score NUMERIC(6,5)`
  - `topic_tags TEXT[]`
  - `engagement JSONB` — counts (likes, retweets, upvotes, …)
  - `raw JSONB` — original provider payload
  - `tsv_en tsvector (generated)` — full-text search over title+content
- **Indexes:**
  - `ix_news_item_published_at` (btree)
  - `ix_news_item_title_trgm` (GIN trigram for fuzzy title search)
  - `ix_news_item_tsv_en` (GIN full-text)
  - `ix_news_item_raw_gin` (GIN on raw JSONB)
  - `ix_news_item_source_external` (btree)
  - `ix_news_item_url` (btree)

**Rationale**
- A single table simplifies ingestion pipelines across providers.
- Monthly partitions keep search fast and enable retention policies.
- Both **trigram** and **full-text** indexes support different search styles (fuzzy vs. linguistic).

---

### 10) `market.news_link` (v004)

Links news/social items to instruments.

- **PK:** `(news_published_at, news_id, instrument_id)`
- **FKs:**  
  - `(news_published_at, news_id)` → `market.news_item(published_at, news_id)` (CASCADE)  
  - `instrument_id` → `market.instrument(instrument_id)` (CASCADE)
- **Columns:** `relevance REAL`, `method TEXT`
- **Index:** `ix_news_link_instrument` for quick “what news affected this instrument?”

**Rationale**
- Separates content from entity linking; supports many-to-many with relevance scoring.
- Multiple linking methods (NER, hashtag parsing, `$TICKER` rules) can co-exist.

---

### 11) `market.sector` (v005)

Tracks how instruments are classified into sector/industry over time.
- **PK:** `sector_id`
- **Unique:** `code`
- **Fields:** `name`

---

### 12) `market.industry` (v005)

Reference table for industries (optionally linked to sector).
- **PK:** `industry_id`
- **Unique:** `code`
- **FK:** `sector_id → market.sector(sector_id) [SET NULL]`
- **Fields:** `name`

---

### 13) `market.instrument_classification` (v005)

Temporal classification (SCD2-lite) of instruments into sector/industry.
- **PK:** `(instrument_id, valid_from)`
- **FKs:**  
  - `instrument_id → market.instrument(instrument_id) [CASCADE]`  
  - `sector_id → market.sector(sector_id) [SET NULL]`  
  - `industry_id → market.industry(industry_id) [SET NULL]`
- **Fields:** `valid_from DATE`, `valid_to DATE NULL` (NULL = current)
- **Index:** `ix_instr_class_current` on `(instrument_id)` where `valid_to IS NULL`

**Rationale**
- Allows reclassification over time without losing history.
- Joins cleanly with features/prices on the date dimension.

---

### 14) `market.etf_holding` (v005)

ETF composition snapshots (constituents & weights) by `as_of_date`.
- **PK:** `(etf_id, component_id, as_of_date)`
- **FKs:** both `etf_id` and `component_id` → `market.instrument(instrument_id)` [CASCADE]
- **Fields:** `weight NUMERIC(9,6)`, `shares NUMERIC(20,6)`, `market_value_usd NUMERIC(20,6)`, `source TEXT`
- **Indexes:** `ix_etf_holding_asof` (as_of_date), `ix_etf_holding_component` (component_id)

**Rationale**
- Supports ETF-driven dependencies and sector/industry rollups.
- Enables features like “ETF-weighted sentiment” or “component-weighted returns”.

---

## Seed Data (from `001_market_core.sql`)

- Exchanges: `NASDAQ (XNAS)`, `NYSE (XNYS)`
- Instruments: `AAPL`, `MSFT` (EQUITY), `QQQ` (ETF) on NASDAQ
- Universe: `core` with `AAPL`, `MSFT`, `QQQ` as active members

---

## Common Queries

### Current members of a universe

```sql
SELECT i.instrument_id, i.symbol
FROM market.v_universe_current c
JOIN market.instrument i USING (instrument_id)
WHERE c.universe_code = 'core'
ORDER BY i.symbol;
```

### Resolve by exact symbol + exchange

```sql
SELECT i.instrument_id, i.symbol
FROM market.instrument i
JOIN market.exchange e ON e.exchange_id = i.exchange_id
WHERE i.symbol = 'AAPL' AND e.code = 'NASDAQ';
```

### Resolve via alias (e.g., from a provider)

```sql
SELECT i.instrument_id, i.symbol
FROM market.instrument_alias a
JOIN market.instrument i ON i.instrument_id = a.instrument_id
WHERE a.source = 'YAHOO' AND a.value = 'AAPL';
```

---

## Reference Data (Git-tracked)

Unlike other subfolders under `data/` that are ignored, **`data/reference/` is version-controlled**.
It contains small, deterministic seed datasets used by SQL seed scripts in `infra/sql/seed/`.

- Example: `data/reference/tickers_core.csv` — input for `infra/sql/seed/seed_instruments_from_csv.sql`
  (upserts exchanges & instruments and links them to the `core` universe).
- Keep files here **small and text-based** (CSV/JSON/YAML). Do **not** place runtime data in this folder.
- When adding new reference files, update the corresponding seed SQL in `infra/sql/seed/` to read them.

---

## General Notes & Rationale

- Use the **stable** `instrument_id` everywhere (prices, features, forecasts) to avoid identity issues on symbol changes.
- **Universes** give a flexible “selected set” mechanism with temporal history via `removed_at`.
- **Aliases** centralize cross-provider mappings.
- The **trigram index** on name supports admin/search tooling and data cleaning.
